while houthis in Yemen have released a
new statement after reports the US is
planning to establish a new Maritime
protection force in the Red Sea houthis
have been carrying out attacks on
commercial ships passing through those
Waters as Bernard was just describing
they say they're targeting ships linked
to Israel in protest against military
actions in Gaza in a statement a
prominent houthi Commander said quote
any escalation in Gaza is an escalation
in the Red Sea and any Cal in Gaza is
considered a calm in the Red Sea he went
on to say any country or party that
comes between us and Palestine we will
confront it Hussein Alti is a political
commentator he's joining us live from
Yemen's capital S thank you very much
indeed for being with us why do the
houthis feel that targeting shipping in
this way is the best way to bring
pressure on Israel the Us and other
foreign
governments uh I mean it's clear the
important of this shib line especially
after they target Israeli link to own
the ship or is or ships that's actually
hidden to Israel they have warned before
those ships not to use the Red Sea and
we've seen according to uh some
International media as an example the
elot port Southern of of occupied
Palestine is is out of out of business
at this point and many ship that they
were heading toward uh uh some part of
uh of the Z state of Israel in the
Mediterranean Sea has stopped as an
example a shiing giant called o which
based on Hong Kong they have said that
they will stop any shiing toward Israel
and it's really strange for the other
giant shipping company like MK and other
one from France and Germany they have
declared that they will not use the Red
Sea actually they are the one who going
to lose a big huge amount of money
because Yen Army only declared that they
will Target any ship that is going to
Israel or have any goes to be delivered
toward Israel and I think that has a
great pressure on Israel if it hasn't
got any pressure why Israel is calling
for the International Community to
respond why bamin netan he said if they
aren going to respond we will respond we
will give the the Germany Britain and uh
us uh few days to respond this show you
that actually the this kind of attack is
hurting Israeli economy and it's really
really symbol in here in Yemen they have
bought it Israel will LIF its blade
against Gaza and allow food and medicine
and fuel ENT Gaza and this is actually
the request of the united nation of the
human right groups uh to lift the
blockade against Gaza is not only a
request from Yemen so uh Israel do that
all that will stop as soon as they stop
their attack against Gaza you the
statement that I referred to before said
that any escalation in Gaza houthis
would regard any escalation in Gaza
would uh as a resulting escalation in
houthi action uh against the US and
Israel and in the Red Sea what would you
regard as an escalation in Gaza and I
want to ask you also about the US plan
to increase the number of uh Naval
protection ships that are going to be in
the Red Sea would you regard that as an
escalation uh first of all any
escalation in Gaza it would be the
continues of Israeli attack and blockade
on Gaza uh and any escalation in the Red
Sea it could it it is considered any uh
slightly movement from the so-call the
new Coalition that the United States is
trying uh to to build in the Red Sea if
any interference with Y many forces
either trying to take a ship or trying
to attack a ship if any interference
will come in the Red Sea against our S
Forces or any interference will will
Target any position or missile launch
position inside Yemen the targeting uh
do ship this could be considered an
escalation and this could actually turn
the entire Red Sea into a battle Zone
and the big one who going to lose from
this is the uh is is the west and as
well uh they have warned country that
actually have bases in uh have American
bases especially Saudi Arabia United
Arab emirat and bahin and other country
because we they believe here that any
attack against Yemen it could actually
be launched from those country because
the Red Sea is really a narrow sea it
will be hard for the United State to
avoid any attack against it ship that's
why if any attack will come from this
country as Muhammad baiti have said A
week ago he's one of thei leaders he
said that uh they will not let any
single oil field or gas field or oil
tanker or any ship belong to this uh
country they will set it on a fire and I
believe that the entire region actually
will come uh as soon as United States
will try to attack Yemen the entire
region will get into a flame and the
United States and Europe should rethink
again because it's winter now they are
in very very big need of this uh oil
coming from this country that's why the
one who's having now the upper hand is
the many forces because they are the one
who control of the Red Sea and as well
they are the one who in control of bab
mandab husin alari is a political
commentator he's been joining us live
from Yemen's Capital Sana thank you very
much indeed for being with us houi
attack
in the Red Sea and US plans to increase
a naval presence there major shipping
firms are suspending Passage through the
Baba mandab straet following a series of
attacks by Iran backed Hui Fighters the
attacks have targeted commercial ships
traveling to egyp sus canal through the
Red Sea as they approach the narrow
Babel mandab straight to the South a
strategically important and busy
Waterway between Africa and the Arabian
Peninsula is only 32 km wide through
which 12% of the world's trade passes
10% of global oil carried by ships also
goes through the straight some companies
have started taking a longer Route
Around Africa and the Cape of Good Hope
which will increase the trip from about
19 days to 31 days adding to the costs
and delays we're going to speak to our
correspondent Hashim aabar who's in the
studio here with us and he's been
covering Yemen and that part of the
world for many years we were talking to
uh houie political commentator just a
moment ago and he was saying that it was
that the houthis were determined that
they were going to be able to manage
this situation in the Red Sea that they
were going to be able to control the
shipping lanes even if the US brought in
this multinational um Coalition of
forces what is interesting is the fact
that only a few years ago we were
talking about the houthis as an armed
group who's defending parts of of Yemen
and trying to take control of other
parts of Yemen now we're essentially
they're in in a process of being able to
as they would suggest it throt one of
the key shipping lanes in the world
indeed this is a defining moment for the
huthis because with their military
capabilities they can easily disrupt the
traffic other at Sea particularly given
that they have the missiles the Drone
attacks they have a maritime uh Force
which is deployed across the coastal
areas that can pose serious threat
in mment the problem with Babel M which
is the southern Outlet of the Red Sea is
that at the narrowest point is about 18
miles with all the LG ships and oil
tankers massive vessels deployed
cruising through that area any attack
any incident can clog all that area
which can have far-reaching consequences
not on the region but on the global
economy because you have a a huge chunk
of the volume of oil fuel and G Energy
that cruises through that area and we've
seen the huis further escalating their
attacks why are they doing this for two
key reasons first of all they're
bolstering their popularity in an
unprecedented way I was with the huthis
about 12 years ago when they were a very
small uh group operating in the northern
part of the country 2014 they've
expanded their influence and they took
over the capital 2015 they move South
the Saudis launched an attack against
them to try to push them back nine years
later they still control a vast
territory in the northern part of the
country came October the 7th they are
widely perceived to be across many parts
of the Arab and Muslim
world the only group that stood against
the Israelis and the Americans because
of their attacks targeting elat and
particularly the attacks targeting
commercial ships what happens tomorrow
we have to wait and see but when you
look at most of the uh tweets by seniori
officials they say they're adamant of
the need to continue the fight I want to
widen this out uh slightly because at
the start of the the Israeli War in Gaza
us support was speculated to be based on
their its perception that the war would
serve to show Iran that some of its
Iran's proxies could be controlled Hamas
is said to be one of them the hudis are
said to be another how much of this do
you think this plan to expand the naval
presence the multinational Naval
presence in this particular region could
actually raise tensions with Iran it
could and it could further destabilize
the
region the Americans believe that they
can replicate what they did in 2008 by
establishing the naval task force that
was combating Somali pirates but this is
different political landscape
although there's a general perception
that the hthis are backed by Iran but
also there was always this consensus
that you you'd better have the huis
control the northern part of the country
instead you will have alqa or other ofs
take over which could just lead to
further
instability just before October the 7th
the Saudis were on the verge of signing
a breakthrough deal with the hthy that
could put an end to the conflict in the
region it was sheld they were waiting to
see what happens in the upcoming weeks I
don't think the Saudis are willing to
see this further escalate into a
confrontation if the Americans decide
tomorrow they have targets they will
start stri striking in Yemen the huis
will definitely have to retaliate
retaliation will
be creating more upset for the Saudis in
particular so I don't see the Saudis
willing to move forward will you be able
to have Arab and Muslim countries
joining this Naval task force that is
going to Target a Muslim country I have
my own personal doubts about it so it's
going to be an extremely delicate F line
that the Americans will have to walk in
the upcoming weeks to convince many
people to join this task force kashm
thank you very much indeed hasham aabar
bringing us up to date and giving us
that analysis there thank you